**V0.7.0**

*This paper presents the historic statement of beliefs that is the
Apostles' Creed, and its biblical influence, one of each the twelve
sections at a time. The creed is a brief, but complete, foundational
resource that is well established across both Old Testament and New
Testament narratives. The creed is a well-rounded representation of the
Christian faith.*

**Why Are We Here? What Are We Saying?**

**Origins**

*There is no evidence that the creed was written by the apostles or Paul
himself; While what is stated in the creed is not found verbatum in Holy
scriptures, the creed is most certainly scriptural. It's debatable, but
the Apostles\' Creed probably developed mostly between the 2nd and the
3th centuries starting with some written accounts around 200. The first
copy of the Apostles' Creed pops up around 340, before the NT was
cannonized. The text can be traced back earlier to the Old Roman Creed,
which is referenced by some of the early Church Fathers. In 650,
Augustine, a bishop in North Africa, reports that the Apostles' Creed is
standard. Safe to say, 400-500 year time period of total development.*

**Authority**

*Historically, the Apostles' Creed is believed to be in full agreement
with the apostolic writings, and the same churches have historically
accepted both the Creed and the Scriptures as authoritative, as faithful
reports of what the apostles taught. Numerous scriptures could be
mentioned as support for the various points of the Creed, to wit, the
second purpose of this paper; To provide an exegesis in terms of
specfically, which scripture(s), and what they have to say, specifically
for each part of the total twelve parts of the entire creed.*

**Historical Relevance & Placement**

*The Apostles' Creed begins with a simple statement of faith in God, who
has all power and is the originator of everything. The Apostles Creed
expresses our belief in the Trinity: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The
Apostles' Creed is not the Nicene Creed. The Nicene Creed is a rejection
of pagan mythologies and it was acceptable to Jews and to some of the
more educated Greeks. The word creed comes from the Latin word
\"credo,\" which means believe. We begin a statement of our Christian
beliefs with the word \"credo\" or \"I believe...\" There were a number
of types baptisimal creeds during the second century (during the time of
persecution, after the apostles, but before the conversion of
Constantine). Baptisimal Creeds were used for educational purposes, like
a call and response, stated, Christian, what do you believe? The
Christian would then respond to the call, afirming the Church\'s beliefs
about the one God who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. A baptisimal
creed is a statement of faith that Chritians, affirm, accepting the
Triune God is an essential part of baptism from the very beginning of
the church.*

**Themes**

*Most of the Creed is about **Jesus Christ**, the person of, and the
defining, and definitive doctrine for, the Christian faith, entirely. It
is also about the **Trinue God**. Two additional themes that are
presented include first, the communion of saints, which refers to the
holy men and women in heaven who remain united with us through the
Church, and secondly, the active participation of the Christian in the
crucificition theme, specifically referring to the time in between
Jesus\'s death and resurrection when he welcomed all righteous souls
into salvation. Additionally, in terms of His death, **decent** into
hell, and **ressuruction** on the third day, describes specifically the
mechanics of how salvation works and how we are saved and actually come
to have newness of life thru being buried with Him in baptism into
death.*

**Summary**

*Beliefs about Jesus separate Christians from everyone else. Jesus was a
specific person, born of a woman, executed under a specific Roman
governor. Unlike mythological deities, he did not come from the distant
and hazy past --- he interacted with the real world. He had a real body
that was born, crucified and buried, and yet he was divine, too ---
conceived by the Holy Spirit, resurrected, ascended into heaven at a
position of supreme power. He is the unique Son of God, a unique Lord
who is above all earthly lords, and he is the Judge who will return to
earth to determine everyone's reward.*

**Trinue God**

**The Trinitarian belief originates in Jesus\'s Great Commission of the
Apostles in Matthew 28 to baptize in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Spirit.**

**Mat 28** In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the
sepulchre. 2 And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of
the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door, and sat upon it. 3 His countenance was like lightning, and his
raiment white as snow: 4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and
became as dead men. 5 And the angel answered and said unto the women,
Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. 6 He is
not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the
Lord lay. 7 And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from
the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye
see him: lo, I have told you. 8 And they departed quickly from the
sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples
word. 9 And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them,
saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped
him. 10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren
that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. 11 Now when they
were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed
unto the chief priests all the things that were done. 12 And when they
were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large
money unto the soldiers, 13 Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night,
and stole him away while we slept. 14 And if this come to the
governor\'s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you. 15 So they took
the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly
reported among the Jews until this day. 16 Then the eleven disciples
went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted. 18 And
Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. 19 Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: 20 Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world. Amen.

**Timeline --** *(historical context in italics)*

**200**

Irenaeus describes a creed

**Has some similarities to the Apostles' Creed.** (*May have been a bit
of a precurser)*

**220**

**Tertullian writes an early Latin version of the Creed in North
Africa**

**235**

**Fall of the Severan Dynasty (*Persecutation begins*)**

**311** (*April*)

**Galerius's Edict of Toleration *(Edict of Serdica)***

*The Edict implicitly granted Christianity the status of religio licita,
a worship that was recognized and accepted by the Roman Empire.*

**313** (*Feburary*)

**Edict of Milan**

*The agreement to treat Christians benevolently within the Roman Empire.
Western Roman Emperor Constantine I and Emperor Licinius, who controlled
the Balkans, met in Mediolanum (modern-day Milan) and, among other
things, agreed to change policies towards Christians following the edict
of toleration issued by Emperor Galerius two years earlier in Serdica.
The Edict of Milan gave Christianity legal status and a reprieve from
persecution.*

**313** (*June*)

**Licinius's Letter**

**330**

**Marcellus, from Asia Minor, pens a similar creed**

**325**

**Council of Nicaea**

*Originally, the Nicene Creed was developed in response to the heretical
beliefs about Jesus being spread by a Christian leader named Arius. The
Catholic bishops, pope, and the Emperor Constantine gathered to affirm
the Church\'s beliefs about the one God who is Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. The Nicene Creed is very descriptive about Jesus\'s humanity and
divinity because it was formulated in response to misguided teachings of
Arius and other heresies. The Apostles Creed includes two phrases that
are not found in the Nicene Creed.* First, \"He descended into hell\"
and second, \"the communion of saints\"

**340**

**First penned version of the Apostles' Creed**

**380** (*February*)

**Edict of Thessalonica**

*The edict was followed in 381 by the First Council of Constantinople,
which affirmed the Nicene Symbolum and gave final form to the
Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed. The edict was issued under the
influence of Ascholius, and thus of Pope Damasus I, who had appointed
him. It re-affirmed a single expression of the Apostolic Faith as
legitimate in the Roman Empire, \"catholic\" (that is, universal) and
\"orthodox\" (that is, correct in teaching). The Nicene Creed states:
\"We believe in one God, the Father Almighty \... And in one Lord Jesus
Christ.\" It declares Jesus Christ be \"consubstantial with the
Father,\" which may be interpreted as numerical or as qualitative
sameness. The Nicene Creed adds that we also believe in the Holy Spirit
but does not say that the Holy Spirit is consubstantial with the Father.
The Edict of Thessalonica goes much further and declares \"the Father,
the Son and the Holy Spirit\" to be \"one deity \... in equal majesty
and in a holy Trinity.\"*

**381**

**Council of Constantinople**

Condemmed Arianism as heresies of "foolish madmen" (a*uthorized
punishment*)

**390**

**Rufinus writes a similar creed after study in Rome, Egypt, and Judea**

**397**

**New Testament is Cannonized**

**650**

**Creed is standard in Gaul *(Modern day France)*** *Augustine, a bishop
in North Africa, reports*

**750**

**The modern accepted text is penned by Pirminius from what is not
modern day Switzerland**

1\. **I believe in God**

**Rom 4:3** For what does the Scripture say? "Abraham *believed* God,
and it was credited to him as righteousness."

*Abraham was saved by faith; Before Moses, the law, organized religion.*

1a. **the Father almighty**

*El Shaddai, the Father Almighty*

1b. **creator of heaven and earth**

*The story of the Creation of the World starts at the beginning of the
bible.*

**Gen 1:1** In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.

**Jhn 1:3** All things were made by him; and without him was not any
thing made that was made.

*Reference to the word which is Christ.*

**Heb 1:10** And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation
of the earth;

and the heavens are the works of thine hands:

2\. **and in Jesus Christ, His only begotton Son, our Lord,**

**1 Pet 2:21** For to this you have been called, because Christ also
*suffered* for you, leaving you an example, so that you might follow in
his steps.

**Col 1:18** And he is the **head of the body**, the church. He is the
beginning, *the* **firstborn from the dead**, that in everything He
might be preeminent.

**1 Cor 15** Now I would remind you, brothers, of the gospel I preached
to you, which you received, in which you stand, and by which you are
being saved, if you hold fast to the word I preached to you---unless you
believed in vain. For I delivered to you as of first importance what I
also received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the
Scriptures, that He was **buried**, that He was **raised on the third
da**y in accordance with the Scriptures, and that He appeared to Cephas,
then to the twelve. Then he appeared to more than five hundred brothers
at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen
asleep. Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles. Last of
all, as to one untimely born, He appeared also to me. For I am the least
of the apostles, unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted
the church of God. But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace
toward me was not in vain. On the contrary, I worked harder than any of
them, though it was not I, but the **grace** of God that is with me.
Whether then it was I or they, so we preach and so you believed.

**Rom 6** What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin that
**grace** may abound? By no means! How can we who died to sin still live
in it? Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ
Jesus **were *baptized into his death*?** We were *buried* therefore
with him by ***baptism into death***, in order that, just as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, **we too might *walk in
newness of life***. For if we have been *united with him in a death like
His*, we shall certainly *be united with him in a resurrection like
His*. We know that our old self was *crucified* with him in order that
the body of sin might be brought to nothing, so that we would no longer
be enslaved to sin. For one who has died has been set free from sin. Now
if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
We know that Christ, being raised from the dead, will never die again;
death no longer has dominion over Him. For the death He died He died to
sin, once for all, but the life He lives He lives to God. So you also
must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, to make you obey its
passions. Do not present your members to sin as instruments for
unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those who have been
brought **from death to life**, and your members to God as instruments
for righteousness. For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are
*not* **under law but under grace**.

**Rom 8** There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in
Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life has set you free in
Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death. For God has done what the
law, weakened by the flesh, could not do. By sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, He condemned sin in the flesh, in
order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in
us, who walk not according to the flesh but **according to the Spirit**.
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things
of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds
on the things of the Spirit. For to set the mind on the **flesh is
death**, but to set the mind on the **Spirit is life** and peace. For
the mind that is set on the **flesh is hostile to God** *(karnal
reasoning)*, for it does not submit to God\'s law; indeed, it cannot.
Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. You, however, are not in
the flesh but in the Spirit, if in fact the Spirit of God dwells in you.
Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him.
But if Christ is in you, although the body is dead because of sin, the
Spirit is life because of righteousness. If the Spirit of Him who raised
Jesus from the dead dwells in you, He who raised Christ Jesus from the
dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through His Spirit who
dwells in you.

3\. **who was conceived by the Holy Spirit**

-   Jesus declares Himself Lord of the Sabbath

**Mat 12:8** For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

**Mrk 2:28** Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

**Luk 6:5** And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of
the sabbath.

-   He allowed people to worship Him

**Rev 22:8** And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had
heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel
which shewed me these things. 9 Then saith he unto me, See thou do it
not: for I am thy fellowservant.

-   He is worthy of worship

**Luk 1:35** And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall
be called the Son of God.

**Jhn 18:36** Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my
kingdom were of

this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered
to the

Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. *(Jesus is worthy of
worship)*

**Rev 22:13** I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first
and the last.

**Isa 44:1-7** 1 Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I
have chosen: 2 Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from
the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou,
Jesurun, whom I have chosen. 3 For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods *(rain)* upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: 4 And they shall
spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses. 5 One
shall say, I am the LORD\'s; and another shall call himself by the name
of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and
surname himself by the name of Israel. 6 Thus saith the LORD the King of
Israel, and his redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the
last; and beside me there is no God. 7 And who, as I, shall call, and
shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the
ancient people? and the things that are coming, and

shall come, let them shew unto them.

-   *Jesus to be greater than Moses, Abraham, and Jacob.*

-   *Jesus claimed to be greater than the Sabbath and the Law.*

-   *Jesus claimed to exist before the world began.*

-   *Jesus claimed to be equal to God.*

-   *Jesus was either a lunatic, a liar, or Lord.*

**C.S. Lewis**

"A man who was merely a man and said the sort of things Jesus said would
not be a great moral teacher. He would either be a lunatic -- on a level
with the man who says he is a poached egg -- or else the Devil of Hell.
You must make your choice. Either this man was, and is, the Son of God
or else a madman or something worse. You can shut him up for a fool, you
can spit at him and kill him as a demon, or you can fall at his feet and
call him Lord and God. But let us not come with any patronizing nonsense
about his being a great moral teacher. He has not left that open to us.
He did not intend to."

3a. **born of the Virgin Mary**

*Jesus was conceived via immaculate conception and was born as a son,
that of Mary, a virgin that had not known a man, and was highly-favored
with the Lord and among women.*

**Luk 1:28** And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that
art highly

favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

**Luk 1:30-31** And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou
hast found favour with God. 31 And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS.

**Luk 1:35** And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon

thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also
that

holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

**Luk 1:42** And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art
thou among

women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

4\. **suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and buried**

*When the Jews brought Jesus to Pilate, three separate times, he said,
"I find no fault in this man." Additionally Romans nor the Jews took His
life, but He laid it down on His own.*

**Jhn 18:38** Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said
this, he went

out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at
all.

**Jhn 19:4** Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them,
Behold, I bring him

forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.

**Jhn 19:6** When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they
cried out,

saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him,
and

crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

**Why did Jesus have to die?**

*Without the shedding of blood, there is no remission of sin. Sin
demands the most severe punishment. The wages of sin is death; Jesus
died in our place. The sanction is fitting to the offense; The penalty
is proportionate to the crime. Self-defense is a reasonable
justification for homicide, but for rage, robbery, and hate crimes, the
punishment is generally fitting to the crime. In this case the penalty
for sin, takes into account all of these factors, whereas, sin is the
transgression of the law. Sin is defying God; It is the ultimate
offense, which requires the ultimate sanction.*

**Mat 27:50-54** Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice,
yielded up the ghost. 51 And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in
twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks
rent; 52 And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which
slept arose, 53 And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. 54 Now when the
centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the
earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

**Heb 10**

*Jesus became our atonement -- "For the law having a shadow of good..."
Historically, blood was shed an ancient times to cover the sins of the
people with the atonement of a spotless animal sacrifice.*

**Jhn 1:29** The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith,
Behold the Lamb

of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.

**Lev 17:11** For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have
given it to you upon

the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that
maketh

an atonement for the soul.

**Mrk 12:30** And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy

soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the
first

commandment.

**Rom 3:25** Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood,

to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through

the forbearance of God;

**Heb 2:18** For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is
able to succour

them that are tempted.

**1 Jhn 2:2** And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours
only, but also

for the sins of the whole world.

**1 Jhn 4:10** Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his

Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

**Heb 9:1-12** Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of
divine service, and a

worldly sanctuary. 2 For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein
was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called
the sanctuary. 3 And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is
called the Holiest of all; 4 Which had the golden censer, and the ark of
the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot
that had manna, and Aaron\'s rod that budded, and the tables of the
covenant; 5 And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat;
of which we

cannot now speak particularly. 6 Now when these things were thus
ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle,
accomplishing the service of God.

7 But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not
without

blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people: 8
The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was
not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: 9
Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both
gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; 10 Which stood only in meats
and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them
until the time of reformation. 11 But Christ being come an high priest
of good things to come, by a greater

and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of
this

building; 12 Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own
blood he entered

in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

5\. **descended into hell, the third day he rose from the dead**

*\* Jesus descended but was [not seperated from the Father]{.ul}. He was
working with the Father, to fulfill The Father's plan, to bear our sins
and provide a salvation for us fully and freely.*

**1 Pet 2:24-25** Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the
tree, that we, being

dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were
healed. 25 For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto
the Shepherd

and Bishop of your souls.

**1 Pet 3:18-20** For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just
for the unjust, that

he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened
by the

Spirit: 19 By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in
prison; 20 Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering
of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing,
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.

**Eph 4:9** (Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended
first into the

lower parts of the earth?

***1 Cor 15:3-8*** For I delivered unto you first of all that which I
also received, how that

Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; 4 And that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
scriptures: 5 And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: 6
After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom
the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep. 7
After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles. 8 And last
of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

***Luke 24:1-5*** Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the
morning, they came

unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and
certain

others with them. 2 And they found the stone rolled away from the
sepulchre. 3 And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord
Jesus. 4 And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout,
behold, two men stood by them in shining garments:

5 And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they
said

unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?

***Mark 12:18** Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection; and they asked him, saying, 19 Master, Moses wrote unto
us, If a man\'s brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no
children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto
his brother. 20 Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a
wife, and dying left no seed. 21 And the second took her, and died,
neither left he any seed: and the third likewise. 22 And the seven had
her, and left no seed: last of all the woman died also. 23 In the
resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of
them? for the seven had her to wife. 24 And Jesus answering said unto
them, Do ye not therefore err, because you know not the scriptures,
neither the power of God? 25 For when they shall rise from the dead,
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels
which are in heaven. 26 And as touching the dead, that they rise: have
ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him,
saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? 27 He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye
therefore do greatly err.*

***2 Cor 4:14** Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall
raise up us also by*

*Jesus, and shall present us with you.*

***Rom 10:9** That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shalt believe*

*in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.*

6\. **He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of God the
Father almighty**

**Act 1:1-7** The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that
Jesus began both

to do and teach, 2 Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he
through the Holy

Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen: 3 To
whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things
pertaining to the kingdom of God: 4 And, being assembled together with
them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but
wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of
me. 5 For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost not many days hence. 6 When they therefore were come
together, they asked of him, saying, Lord,

wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? 7 And he
said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons,
which the Father hath put in his own power. 8 But ye shall receive
power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and

ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and
in

Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. 9 And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud
received him out of their sight.

10 And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold,
two men stood by them in white apparel; 11 Which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like

manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

**Eph 1:20** Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and set him

at his own right hand in the heavenly places,

**Eph 2:6** And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places\
in Christ Jesus:

7\. **from there, He will come to judge the quick and the dead**

*The first people to use the word quick did not have speed in mind at
all. The phrase \"the quick and the dead\" gives a clue about what they
meant. This phrase is from the Bible\'s New Testament, where the Day of
Judgment is described as the time when Jesus will return from heaven to
judge everyone, both the quick and the dead, determining who will have
eternal life and who will be damned. (The phrase has also been used as
the name of various books and movies.) It\'s clear who \"the dead\" are.
\"The quick,\" meanwhile, is everyone else. That\'s right: quick
originally meant \"not dead\"---that is, \"living, alive.\" The word
traces back to the Old English cwic, and shares an ancestor with the
Latin words vivus and vivere, meaning respectively \"living\" and \"to
live,\" as well as with the Greek bios and zōē, meaning \"life.\" Its
original meaning is evident in a few other modern uses as well, such as
quicken when it\'s used to mean \"to reach the stage of gestation at
which fetal motion is felt.\" (Quick itself also has an archaic meaning
of \"pregnant.\")*

**Acts 10:42** And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick
and dead.

**2 Tim 4:1** I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his
kingdom.

**1 Pet 4:5** Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the
quick and the dead.

**1 Ths 4:16** For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and
the dead in Christ shall rise first.

8\. **I believe in the Holy Spirit**

*Paraclete (Ancient Greek: παράκλητος, Latin: paracletus) means
\'advocate\' or \'helper\'. In Christianity, the term paraclete most
commonly refers to the Holy Spirit. The word parakletos is a verbal
adjective, often used of one called to help in a lawcourt. In the Jewish
tradition the word was transcribed with Hebrew letters and used for
angels, prophets, and the just as advocates before God\'s court. The
word also acquired the meaning of \'one who consoles\' (cf. Job 16:2,
Theodotion\'s and Aquila\'s translations; the LXX has the correct word
parakletores). It is probably wrong to explain the Johannine parakletos
on the basis of only one religious background. The word is filled with a
complex meaning: the Spirit replaces Jesus, is an advocate and a
witness, but also consoles the disciples.*

**Jhn 14:16** And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

**Jhn 14:26** But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

**Jhn 15:26** But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
Father, he shall testify of me:

**Jhn 16:7-8** Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for
you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. 8 And when he is
come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment:

**Jhn 16:13** Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will
guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you
things to come.

9a. **the Holy Catholic Church**

*The word catholic comes from the Greek phrase καθόλου katholou \'on the
whole, according to the whole, in general\', and is a combination of the
Greek words κατά \'about\' and ὅλος \'whole\'. The first known use of
\"Catholic\" was by the church father Saint Ignatius of Antioch in his
Letter to the Smyrnaeans.*

***Romans, 1 Corinthians, and Ephesians**, refer to the church as the
body of Christ. The church is made up of all believers. The church is an
organism not an organization. The church is not about being a member of
a denomination, a social program, or a political movement. The word
church is Ecclesia which means "called out ones". We are in the world,
not of the world.*

*Noun. ecclesia (plural ecclesiae) (historical) The public legislative
assembly of the Athenians. (ecclesiastical) A church, either as a body
or as a building. (biblical) The congregation, the group of believers,
symbolic body or building. The ecclesia or ekklesia was the assembly of
the citizens in city-states of ancient Greece.*

**Jhn 15:4** Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit
of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide
in me.

*\* We do not need to pray to saints. Jesus says no one comes to The
Father except thru Him.*

**Rom 12:3-8** For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man
that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man
the measure of faith. 4 For as we have many members in one body, and all
members have not the same office: 5 So we, being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another. 6 Having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy,
let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; 7 Or ministry, let
us wait on our ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching; 8 Or he
that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it with
simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with
cheerfulness.

**1 Cor 12:27-31** Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular. 28 And God hath set some in the church, first apostles,
secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts
of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. 29 Are all
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of
miracles? 30 Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues?
do all interpret? 31 But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I
unto you a more excellent way.

**Eph 4:14-16** That we should no longer be children, tossed to and fro
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men,
in the cunning craftiness of deceitful plotting, 15 but, speaking the
truth in love, may grow up in all things into Him who is the head ---
Christ --- 16 from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by what
every joint supplies, according to the effective working by which every
part does its share, causes growth of the body for the edifying of
itself in love."

Corpus Christi

9b. **the Communion of the Saints**

*Koinonia (/ˌkɔɪnoʊˈniːə/) is a transliterated form of the Greek word
κοινωνία, which refers to concepts such as fellowship, joint
participation, the share which one has in anything, a gift jointly
contributed, a collection, a contribution. The communion of saints
(communio sanctorum), when referred to persons, is the spiritual union
of the members of the Christian Church, living and the dead, but
excluding the damned. They are all part of a single \"mystical body\",
with Christ as the head, in which each member contributes to the good of
all and shares in the welfare of all.*

*The earliest known use of this term to refer to the belief in a
mystical bond uniting both the living and the dead in a confirmed hope
and love is by Saint Nicetas of Remesiana (c. 335--414); the term has
since then played a central role in formulations of the Christian
creed.*

*\* To be one with Christ and one with one another.*

***Martin Luther***

\"The communion of saints.\" This is of one piece with the preceding
\[\"the holy catholic church\"\]. Formerly it was not in the creed. When
you hear the word \"church,\" understand that it means group \[Haufe\],
as we say in German, the Wittenberg group or congregation \[Gemeine\],
that is, an holy, Christian group, assembly, or, in German, the holy,
common church, and it is a word that should not be called \"communion\"
\[Gemeinschaft\], but rather \"a congregation\" eine Gemeine. Someone
wanted to explain the first term, \"catholic church\" \[and added the
words\] communio sanctorum, which in German means a congregation of
saints, that is, a congregation made up only of saints. \"Christian
church\" and \"congregation of saints\" are one and the same thing.

***Psalm 55:13-14** But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and
mine acquaintance.*

*14 We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company.*

***Psalm 133:1** Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity!*

***Luke 22:32** But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.*

***John 17:21** That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me,
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may
believe that thou hast sent me.*

***James 5:16** Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man availeth much.*

***1 Ths 5:11** Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one
another, even as also ye do.*

***1 Ths 4:18** Wherefore comfort one another with these words.*

***1 Cor 10:16** The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ?*

***1 Cor 1:9** God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.*

10\. **the forgiveness of sins,**

11\. **the resurrection of the body**

Paradise, paraiso

12\. **and the life everlasting. Amen.**

**Sources**

Since You Asked Podcast - Jim Berrier (CGM Radio)

[The Apostles' Creed - Grace Communion
International](https://www.gci.org/articles/the-apostles-creed/)

Constantine the Great and Christianity - Wikipedia

The Apostles Creed vs. Nicene Creed -- The Religion Teacher
([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dH5StNyn0gY&t=2s))

Mere Christianity -- C.S. Lewis

Merriam Webster Dictionary, 2022

Wikipedia, 2022

Martin Luther

[The Dates of Easter Sunday -- Panos Antsaklis
Notre Dame, Indiana](https://www3.nd.edu/~pantsakl/Archive/dateofeaster.pdf)
